README.adoc, before:

= Site

image:https://circleci.com/gh/juxt/site/tree/master.svg?style=svg["CircleCI", link="https://circleci.com/gh/juxt/site/tree/master"]

Site is a project from https://juxt.pro[JUXT] to build a Resource Server out of
our open-source https://xtdb.com[XTDB] database.

Site supports web content, and https://www.openapis.org/[OpenAPI]. You can use
Site as a versioned
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_management_system[Content Management
System].

An official (work in progress) documentation website can be found https://juxtsite.netlify.app/[here].

NOTE: A new version of Site is being developed here: https://github.com/juxt-site/site

== What is Site?

Site is a Resource Server, built on the XTDB database.

You can put things into Site with (HTTP) PUT requests. When you do this, Site
will put (the representation of) your thing (document, image, video, data…) into
the database. You can get these later with a (HTTP) GET request with the same
URI. In this way, Site behaves like a web server, with an immutable bitemporal
content store.

=== APIs

If you PUT a JSON document with a `Content-Type` of
`application/vnd.oai.openapi+json;version=3.0.2`, Site will treat this as an
https://www.openapis.org/[OpenAPI] API definition, and serve that API for
you. This OpenAPI API definition will contain the API endpoints, and provide
schemas for the data transferred by the API. This tells the server how to
validate data coming in to the API, and how to construct data on the way out.

APIs served from Site are good web citizens. They implement HTTP method
semantics properly, with support for content negotiation, conditional requests,
range requests and authentication.

APIs are also able to benefit from Site's authorization module, Pass, providing
Policy-Based Access Control, loosely based on XACML.

== Test drive

=== Requirements

Before you start, you'll need to have the following installed:

* Java 9+ (Site is not compatible with Java 8 and below!)
* https://clojure.org/guides/getting_started[Clojure] and
* https://github.com/babashka/babashka[Babashka] installed on your system.

=== Clone this repo

----
$ git clone https://github.com/juxt/site
----

====  macOS (>= 10.15)
It is recommended to install `openssl` and `openjdk` and make sure `JAVA_HOME`
is set correctly. At the time of writing brew installs openjdk 17.02 and openssl
3.0.1:
----
$ brew install openssl
$ echo export JAVA_HOME=/usr/local/Cellar/openjdk/17.0.2/libexec/openjdk.jdk/Contents/Home >> ~/.zshrc
$ exec zsh -l
----

Check that Java can find `libcrypto`:
----
$ cd site # (if needed)
$ clojure -A:dev -M:test -m kaocha.runner --focus juxt.site.authz-test
----

The test should run just fine. If instead $JAVA_HOME/bin/java aborts (signal 6)
with the message:
----
$ ...
$ ... WARNING: ${JAVA_HOME}/bin/java is loading libcrypto in an unsafe way
----

you need to make libcrypto visible to $JAVA_HOME/bin/java by running e.g.:
----
$ ln -s  /usr/local/Cellar/openssl@3/3.0.1/lib/libcrypto.dylib $JAVA_HOME/lib
----

=== Configure

There's a sample configuration in `etc` you should copy to `$HOME/.config/site/config.edn`.

----
$ mkdir -p $HOME/.config/site
$ cp site/etc/config.edn $HOME/.config/site/config.edn
----

=== Configure a password

[TIP]
--
If you have `pass` installed, this is a good time to configure a password for
your superuser. We'll assume the superuser will be named `admin`, but feel free
to choose your own username here.

----
$ pass generate -n site/local/admin
----
--

=== Start the server

Start the Site server:

----
$ site/bin/site-server
----

NOTE: Alternatively, if you're familiar with Clojure development, you can start
the server via the `deps.edn` file and simply 'jack-in' with your editor or IDE
as normal.

=== Start multiple instances of the server

If you require multiple Site servers to coexist on the same machine, you can start site passing a different configuration file as follows:

----
$ SITE_CONFIG=/absolute/path/custom-site-config.edn site/bin/site-server
----

In this case please be sure to change the configuration so ports are different and XTDB files are stored in a separate folder than the ones specified in the example configuration file. You'll also need to specify Site host:port when using site commands, for example:

----
$ SITE_BASE_URI=http://localhost:5509 site/bin/site get-token -u admin
----

=== Start the server from the provided Docker image

Optionally, you can also get Site up and running using the provided Docker image. You need Docker installed in your system, then execute the following from the command line (`sudo` might not be necessary depending on your installation):

```
sudo docker build -t juxt/site:latest .
sudo docker run -p 2021:2021 -p 50505:50505 -d juxt/site:latest
```

=== The REPL

If you've run Site via your development environment and 'jacked-in' you'll
already have a REPL. Proceed to the next step.

If you're running Site with `site/bin/site-server`, you'll need to connect a
terminal to Site to access the REPL. You can do this via port 50505, which is a
socket REPL that Site starts by default.

How you connect to this port is up to you. One way is via `ncat`, but you can replace `ncat` with `telnet`, or `netcat`, depending on what's available for your system.

[NOTE]
--
Arch users can install `ncat` by installing the `nmap` package:

----
$ sudo pacman -Sy nmap
----
--

----
$ ncat localhost 50505
----

[TIP]
--
Prefix the command with `rlwrap` if you have it installed.

----
$ rlwrap ncat localhost 50505
----
--

=== Bootstrap

Bootstrap the new system by adding the minimum resources that are required to allow remote access.

----
Site by JUXT. Copyright (c) 2021, JUXT LTD.
Type :repl/quit to exit

[ ]  Site API not installed.  Enter (put-site-api!) to fix this.
[ ]  Authentication resources not installed.  Enter (put-auth-resources!) to fix this.
[ ]  Role of superuser not yet created. Enter (put-superuser-role!) to fix this.
[ ]  No superusers exist. Enter (put-superuser! <username> <fullname>)
     or (put-superuser! <username> <fullname> <password>) to fix this.
site>
----

Install the Site API:

----
site> (put-site-api!)
----

Install the authentication rules:

----
site> (put-auth-resources!)
----

Install the superuser role:

----
site> (put-superuser-role!)
----

Finally, create a superuser. If you have `pass` installed, this will fetch the password directly:

----
site> (put-superuser! "admin" "Administrator")
----

NOTE: We recommend that you generate a password with `pass`.

If you don't have `pass` installed, you can add a password as a final argument to `put-superuser!`.

----
site> (put-superuser! "admin" "Administrator" "admin")
----

Replace `"admin"`, `"Administrator"` and `"admin"` with your own username, full name and password respectively.

Quit the REPL, for example, with `Ctrl-C` or by typing `:repl/quit`.

=== Run the site tool

The site tool is a command-line utility that allows you to remotely administer site.

If you're on MacOS, you will need to install the gnu version of `readlink`. You can do so with brew:
```
brew install coreutils
ln -s /usr/local/bin/greadlink /usr/local/bin/readlink
```

We must first get a token that we can use for API access. This process authenticates to the site server using your password.

.Here, replace `admin` with your username (or let it default to your OS username)
----
$ site/bin/site get-token -u admin
----

Now we can use the site tool for remote administration. Try the following:

----
$ site/bin/site list-users
----

== Configure the expiry time for tokens

By default, tokens last for an hour. That can sometimes mean they expire during
work sessions. You can set the expiry time of new tokens via the REPL.

----
(put! (assoc (e "http://localhost:2021/_site/token")  ::pass/expires-in (* 24 3600)))
----

== License

The MIT License (MIT)

Copyright © 2020-2021 JUXT LTD.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of
this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in
the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to
use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of
the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER
IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Add note about Site 2.0
Since Site 2.0 lives in its own organisation, it's important to add this to avoid confusing people about which version of Site they should look at.

README.adoc, after:

IMPORTANT: This is the repository for Site 1.0. If you are looking for the latest version (Site 2.0), it is at https://github.com/juxt-site/site.

= Site

image:https://circleci.com/gh/juxt/site/tree/master.svg?style=svg["CircleCI", link="https://circleci.com/gh/juxt/site/tree/master"]

Site is a project from https://juxt.pro[JUXT] to build a Resource Server out of
our open-source https://xtdb.com[XTDB] database.

Site supports web content, and https://www.openapis.org/[OpenAPI]. You can use
Site as a versioned
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_management_system[Content Management
System].

An official (work in progress) documentation website can be found https://juxtsite.netlify.app/[here].

NOTE: A new version of Site is being developed here: https://github.com/juxt-site/site

== What is Site?

Site is a Resource Server, built on the XTDB database.

You can put things into Site with (HTTP) PUT requests. When you do this, Site
will put (the representation of) your thing (document, image, video, data…) into
the database. You can get these later with a (HTTP) GET request with the same
URI. In this way, Site behaves like a web server, with an immutable bitemporal
content store.

=== APIs

If you PUT a JSON document with a `Content-Type` of
`application/vnd.oai.openapi+json;version=3.0.2`, Site will treat this as an
https://www.openapis.org/[OpenAPI] API definition, and serve that API for
you. This OpenAPI API definition will contain the API endpoints, and provide
schemas for the data transferred by the API. This tells the server how to
validate data coming in to the API, and how to construct data on the way out.

APIs served from Site are good web citizens. They implement HTTP method
semantics properly, with support for content negotiation, conditional requests,
range requests and authentication.

APIs are also able to benefit from Site's authorization module, Pass, providing
Policy-Based Access Control, loosely based on XACML.

== Test drive

=== Requirements

Before you start, you'll need to have the following installed:

* Java 9+ (Site is not compatible with Java 8 and below!)
* https://clojure.org/guides/getting_started[Clojure] and
* https://github.com/babashka/babashka[Babashka] installed on your system.

=== Clone this repo

----
$ git clone https://github.com/juxt/site
----

====  macOS (>= 10.15)
It is recommended to install `openssl` and `openjdk` and make sure `JAVA_HOME`
is set correctly. At the time of writing brew installs openjdk 17.02 and openssl
3.0.1:
----
$ brew install openssl
$ echo export JAVA_HOME=/usr/local/Cellar/openjdk/17.0.2/libexec/openjdk.jdk/Contents/Home >> ~/.zshrc
$ exec zsh -l
----

Check that Java can find `libcrypto`:
----
$ cd site # (if needed)
$ clojure -A:dev -M:test -m kaocha.runner --focus juxt.site.authz-test
----

The test should run just fine. If instead $JAVA_HOME/bin/java aborts (signal 6)
with the message:
----
$ ...
$ ... WARNING: ${JAVA_HOME}/bin/java is loading libcrypto in an unsafe way
----

you need to make libcrypto visible to $JAVA_HOME/bin/java by running e.g.:
----
$ ln -s  /usr/local/Cellar/openssl@3/3.0.1/lib/libcrypto.dylib $JAVA_HOME/lib
----

=== Configure

There's a sample configuration in `etc` you should copy to `$HOME/.config/site/config.edn`.

----
$ mkdir -p $HOME/.config/site
$ cp site/etc/config.edn $HOME/.config/site/config.edn
----

=== Configure a password

[TIP]
--
If you have `pass` installed, this is a good time to configure a password for
your superuser. We'll assume the superuser will be named `admin`, but feel free
to choose your own username here.

----
$ pass generate -n site/local/admin
----
--

=== Start the server

Start the Site server:

----
$ site/bin/site-server
----

NOTE: Alternatively, if you're familiar with Clojure development, you can start
the server via the `deps.edn` file and simply 'jack-in' with your editor or IDE
as normal.

=== Start multiple instances of the server

If you require multiple Site servers to coexist on the same machine, you can start site passing a different configuration file as follows:

----
$ SITE_CONFIG=/absolute/path/custom-site-config.edn site/bin/site-server
----

In this case please be sure to change the configuration so ports are different and XTDB files are stored in a separate folder than the ones specified in the example configuration file. You'll also need to specify Site host:port when using site commands, for example:

----
$ SITE_BASE_URI=http://localhost:5509 site/bin/site get-token -u admin
----

=== Start the server from the provided Docker image

Optionally, you can also get Site up and running using the provided Docker image. You need Docker installed in your system, then execute the following from the command line (`sudo` might not be necessary depending on your installation):

```
sudo docker build -t juxt/site:latest .
sudo docker run -p 2021:2021 -p 50505:50505 -d juxt/site:latest
```

=== The REPL

If you've run Site via your development environment and 'jacked-in' you'll
already have a REPL. Proceed to the next step.

If you're running Site with `site/bin/site-server`, you'll need to connect a
terminal to Site to access the REPL. You can do this via port 50505, which is a
socket REPL that Site starts by default.

How you connect to this port is up to you. One way is via `ncat`, but you can replace `ncat` with `telnet`, or `netcat`, depending on what's available for your system.

[NOTE]
--
Arch users can install `ncat` by installing the `nmap` package:

----
$ sudo pacman -Sy nmap
----
--

----
$ ncat localhost 50505
----

[TIP]
--
Prefix the command with `rlwrap` if you have it installed.

----
$ rlwrap ncat localhost 50505
----
--

=== Bootstrap

Bootstrap the new system by adding the minimum resources that are required to allow remote access.

----
Site by JUXT. Copyright (c) 2021, JUXT LTD.
Type :repl/quit to exit

[ ]  Site API not installed.  Enter (put-site-api!) to fix this.
[ ]  Authentication resources not installed.  Enter (put-auth-resources!) to fix this.
[ ]  Role of superuser not yet created. Enter (put-superuser-role!) to fix this.
[ ]  No superusers exist. Enter (put-superuser! <username> <fullname>)
     or (put-superuser! <username> <fullname> <password>) to fix this.
site>
----

Install the Site API:

----
site> (put-site-api!)
----

Install the authentication rules:

----
site> (put-auth-resources!)
----

Install the superuser role:

----
site> (put-superuser-role!)
----

Finally, create a superuser. If you have `pass` installed, this will fetch the password directly:

----
site> (put-superuser! "admin" "Administrator")
----

NOTE: We recommend that you generate a password with `pass`.

If you don't have `pass` installed, you can add a password as a final argument to `put-superuser!`.

----
site> (put-superuser! "admin" "Administrator" "admin")
----

Replace `"admin"`, `"Administrator"` and `"admin"` with your own username, full name and password respectively.

Quit the REPL, for example, with `Ctrl-C` or by typing `:repl/quit`.

=== Run the site tool

The site tool is a command-line utility that allows you to remotely administer site.

If you're on MacOS, you will need to install the gnu version of `readlink`. You can do so with brew:
```
brew install coreutils
ln -s /usr/local/bin/greadlink /usr/local/bin/readlink
```

We must first get a token that we can use for API access. This process authenticates to the site server using your password.

.Here, replace `admin` with your username (or let it default to your OS username)
----
$ site/bin/site get-token -u admin
----

Now we can use the site tool for remote administration. Try the following:

----
$ site/bin/site list-users
----

== Configure the expiry time for tokens

By default, tokens last for an hour. That can sometimes mean they expire during
work sessions. You can set the expiry time of new tokens via the REPL.

----
(put! (assoc (e "http://localhost:2021/_site/token")  ::pass/expires-in (* 24 3600)))
----

== License

The MIT License (MIT)

Copyright © 2020-2021 JUXT LTD.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of
this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in
the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to
use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of
the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER
IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
