doc/next/Site.adoc, before:

= Site
Malcolm Sparks <mal@juxt.pro>
:doctype: book
:toc: left
:toclevels: 2
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:xrefstyle: short
:stem:

[colophon]
--
First Edition.

Copyright © 2022, JUXT LTD. All Rights Reserved.

Published by JUXT Text.

This book is written with Asciidoctor.

Available in PDF, ebook and HTML editions.

HTML edition available at https://text.juxt.site/site-book.html

--

toc::[]

= Introduction

include::Introduction.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::Values.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::Principles.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Getting Started

include::Installation.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Preliminaries

If you're in a hurry, or want to get started quickly with Site, you should skip
these chapters and move onto <<ch-resources>>.

However, in keeping with our value of <<understanding,Understanding>>, we
recommended that you invest time in building up both your working and conceptual
knowledge of Site. These chapters will help to build up your knowledge of Site
'from scratch'. If you've chosen this course, welcome to the slow track!

include::Elements.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-users]]
include::Users.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-actions]]
include::Actions.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-permissions]]
include::Permissions.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-creating-users]]
include::UsersRevisited.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-protection-spaces]]
include::ProtectionSpaces.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-applications]]
include::Applications.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Resources

[[ch-resources]]
include::Resources.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::Representations.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::ProtectingResources.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::BasicAuthentication.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Applications and APIs

[[ch-first-application]]
include::FirstApplication.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-openapi]]
include::OpenAPI.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-graphql]]
include::GraphQL.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= OpenID

[[ch-authentication-with-openid]]
include::AuthenticationWithOpenID.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Going further

include::ErrorResources.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

// Create an action to list-identities
// Create a resource at /users that is attached to list-identities

// include::APIs.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

// [[authorization]]
// include::Authorization.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::NextSteps.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::AppDevelopment.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Websites with Site

include::Templates.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Backmatter

include::Glossary.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[index]
== Index

Commit message:

Reorder parts of the Site book
This reduces the size of the Preliminaries part, which was getting bloated.

The chapters concerning Protection Spaces and Applications are now moved to
their own parts.

doc/next/Site.adoc, after:

= Site
Malcolm Sparks <mal@juxt.pro>
:doctype: book
:toc: left
:toclevels: 2
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:xrefstyle: short
:stem:

[colophon]
--
First Edition.

Copyright © 2022, JUXT LTD. All Rights Reserved.

Published by JUXT Text.

This book is written with Asciidoctor.

Available in PDF, ebook and HTML editions.

HTML edition available at https://text.juxt.site/site-book.html

--

toc::[]

= Introduction

include::Introduction.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::Values.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::Principles.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Getting Started

include::Installation.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Preliminaries

If you're in a hurry, or want to get started quickly with Site, you should skip
these chapters and move onto <<ch-resources>>.

However, in keeping with our value of <<understanding,Understanding>>, we
recommended that you invest time in building up both your working and conceptual
knowledge of Site. These chapters will help to build up your knowledge of Site
'from scratch'. If you've chosen this course, welcome to the slow track!

include::Elements.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-users]]
include::Users.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-actions]]
include::Actions.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-permissions]]
include::Permissions.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-creating-users]]
include::UsersRevisited.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Resources

[[ch-resources]]
include::Resources.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::Representations.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Authentication

Actions are integrated with authorization rules, providing a rich access control
layer between users and data.

Most authorization rules refer to the Subject of the request. To identify the
Subject, we need to authenticate each request.

This part contains all the information you need to authenticate users.

[[ch-protection-spaces]]
include::ProtectionSpaces.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::ProtectingResources.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::BasicAuthentication.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::AuthenticationWithOpenID.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Applications and APIs

[[ch-applications]]
include::Applications.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-first-application]]
include::FirstApplication.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-openapi]]
include::OpenAPI.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[[ch-graphql]]
include::GraphQL.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Going further

include::ErrorResources.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

// Create an action to list-identities
// Create a resource at /users that is attached to list-identities

// include::APIs.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

// [[authorization]]
// include::Authorization.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::NextSteps.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

include::AppDevelopment.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Websites with Site

include::Templates.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

= Backmatter

include::Glossary.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[index]
== Index
